In recent times,
a very popular segment
on the Gilead graduations
has been a video presentation
that features one of the instructors
along with the students
called The Inside Story.
And we’re happy to present
such a program today.
The instructor who is going to serve
as the moderator of this discussion
is Brother Trent Lippold,
and the students are going to get a chance
to see what they look like on camera.
Enjoy the program.
February 1, 2018,
marked an anniversary
for the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
Over the past 75 years,
Gilead graduates have been going out
to the ends of the earth
to strengthen and stabilize
Jehovah’s organization.
And we just love reading
yearbook experiences,
and many of them are from those places
that Gilead graduates have gone to.
Well, today,
we have the special opportunity
to see and to hear
some of the experiences
of the 144th class of Gilead.
So it’s my pleasure to welcome you
to this edition of The Inside Story.
Well, we’d like to introduce,
right away, our first guest,
and it’s Brother Alejandro Bascope
from Bolivia.
Welcome, Alejandro.
It’s great to have you with us today.
You and your wife, Ivon,
serve together at the Bolivia branch.
Can you tell us a little bit
about what you do there?
For the last 11 years, I have been working
in the Service Department
helping to organize
the preaching efforts in the country.
Very nice.
And before you came to Bethel,
what were you doing?
Before Bethel, my wife and I
spent some years in the circuit work,
and before that,
we were special pioneers.
Very nice.
So being at the branch,
in the Service Department in Bolivia,
must give you a nice opportunity
to see the work that’s going on in Bolivia.
Would you mind giving us a little update
of how the work is going in Bolivia?
Of course.
Currently, we have
more than 27,000 publishers in Bolivia.
And last year,
we had an increase of 4 percent.
And we can see
a great potential for the future
because we are conducting
more than 43,000 Bible studies.
Wow, that is amazing!
It sounds like the truth
is reaching everywhere in Bolivia.
Well, actually,
not everywhere, but we are improving.
So, what do you mean by that,
not exactly everywhere?
Bolivia has about 11 million people.
And while most live in urban areas,
there are about 35,000
living in isolated spots
along three main rivers in the north
—Madre de Dios River,
Beni River, and Mamoré River.
So, what are you doing to reach those people?
Well, in 2015, brothers started to organize
the “four by four” preaching campaigns.
“Four by four”
—that’s interesting.
Here we preach two by two.
So is that . . .
Yes, “four by four”
refers to our vehicles.
Of course!
Last year,
we had more than 300 vehicle groups
participating in this campaign.
We were able to reach many villages,
but not all of them
because some had no road access at all.
Wow, that isolated.
So how do you reach these places then
that have no road access?
Well, we began renting boats.
We were able to reach
many villages for the first time.
We started many Bible studies.
And after that, we reported the success
to the Service Committee
of the Governing Body.
Wow, that sounds—
I mean, it sounds
like you solved the problem.
Yes and no.
We realized that in order
to continue preaching there,
we needed just a small thing
—our own boat.
Your own boat—
What was wrong with the rented boats?
Was there a problem?
Well, not a problem, but many problems.
Here’s an example
of the boats we used to rent.
You can see they are wooden, old;
people and supplies are all crammed together.
And in order to be more effective,
we realized that we needed our own boat.
It would be
a little bit safer too, I suspect.
Yes, you cannot be effective
if you are squished.
So tell us, did you get your own boat?
Yeah, and we even gave it a name,
Messenger of the Kingdom,
or, in Spanish,
Mensajero Del Reino.
Very nice.
So, what’s it like?
How does preaching with boats work?
Well, can I show you?
Sure!
Bolivia’s river witnessing
started with wooden boats.
But Jehovah says that instead of the wood,
he would bring in better, stronger materials.
Messenger of the Kingdom
is custom-made for river witnessing.
It’s small,
so it can be taken to different towns
and launched closer to where we’ll preach.
The roof holds literature and supplies.
Over 200 pioneers applied to help.
They meet plenty of creatures on the river.
With some, you don’t want to get too close.
Jehovah’s beautiful creation
is part of the journey.
But the brothers and sisters
are looking for people,
ones “rightly disposed for everlasting life.”
They’ll often find interest in the morning,
make return visits in the afternoon,
and invite them to a meeting
that same evening.
A trip lasts seven to ten days.
All the work and preparation
is worth the effort.
And before they know it,
it’s back on the river
and on to the next village.
Alejandro, that looks very exciting.
Yes.
Of course,
there are many potential dangers,
like animals, strong currents, rocks.
But it’s worth it.
For example, in the village of Barranquilla,
brothers met Alessandro
the first time they came.
And the next time,
the whole village was waiting with Alessandro
—over 40 people.
All of them wanted to hear the good news,
and many Bible studies were started.
What a tremendous response!
I think, Alejandro,
that you’re going to have
a lot more applicants
to go on these boat-preaching tours.
So, what would you say has been the effect
on the publishers who make
the trips to preach?
Well, honestly, at first we were concerned
about sending pioneers to the jungle.
But they actually thanked us
because they said
it was very encouraging
to share the truth
with many interested people.
They said it was a spiritual gift for them.
For me and other brothers at the branch,
it was very faith-strengthening
to see how Jehovah removes any obstacles
in order for the people
to hear the good news.
Very nice.
And it’s faith-strengthening to us
to be able to see those experiences.
I can see why those pioneers
thanked you for that opportunity.
You have the nice privilege
of organizing this work
by working in the Service Department.
But let me ask you, Alejandro,
how many trips have you been on?
None yet.
My wife, Ivon, says
that I need to become a good swimmer first.
Your wife, Ivon, is a smart woman.
Thank you very much, Alejandro,
for sharing your experiences with us.
So we’d like to invite out our next guest,
and it’s Brother Arlindo Tito
from Mozambique.
Welcome, Arlindo.
Arlindo, you are coming from Mozambique.
Would you mind sharing a little bit
of your background with us?
Sure,
I inherited the truth
from my parents and my grandparents.
And for the last seven years,
I have been working
at the branch in Mozambique
—for some time,
in the Audio/Video Department,
but for most of the time
in the Accounting Department.
That’s a beautiful spiritual heritage
that you have
—and now Gilead School.
But I understand
that one of your assignments at Bethel
was connected with part
of the rich spiritual history of Mozambique.
Yes, I had this privilege.
But I could say
that it all started with singing.
Singing?
How was that?
Could you explain that?
Well,
there was a time when singing
was like a spiritual anchor
for the brothers in Mozambique.
Before 1991,
we were under ban in Mozambique.
So because the brothers
didn’t want to get involved in politics,
they were sent to a concentration camp.
It was a reeducation camp
—the government
was trying to change their minds.
So the life there could be very difficult,
but the brothers would find
a way to worship Jehovah.
They would meet secretly.
This is an example
of a meeting that was held there
in the middle of the forest at that time.
It must have been very anxious for them
—anxious moments having to meet
together in secret like that.
Yes, and it was at that time when singing
became like a spiritual anchor for them.
Right at the beginning,
they were singing to stay courageous.
In fact, the authorities were surprised
because the brothers,
instead of crying, they were singing.
And at that time,
there were older brothers
who would teach other brothers
to read the musical notes,
and they would memorize the songs.
And when they had no Bibles or songbooks
and they were together,
they would just sing.
Wow, that is absolutely beautiful
—the power of Kingdom songs.
Very nice.
So we know that after the ban in 1991,
the brothers were now free to worship.
So did singing continue to be
an important part of their worship?
Well, that’s what we wanted.
It sounds like there’s a story.
Would you mind explaining that?
After the ban,
we had many new ones
coming into the truth.
But in many rural areas in Mozambique,
we have no electricity, no sound system,
no recording of the songs.
So at that time, it became a real challenge
for the brothers to sing at the meetings.
What about the older ones,
the ones who sang in the camps,
couldn’t they help the new ones?
Yes, but many of them had moved away,
especially to the cities.
So in rural areas, there was a great need.
OK, but what about songbooks?
Surely you had songbooks.
Yes, we had them.
But most could not read the musical notes.
So they would sing, yes,
but the melody would sound
a little bit different from what we know.
Yeah, so now we had freedom;
they could worship Jehovah.
But because of not having a sound system,
they couldn’t fully enjoy the meetings
because they couldn’t hear clearly
what was being taught at the meetings.
That must have been
very discouraging in a sense.
Well, did they get the help they needed?
Yes, they did.
And this is the beauty of this organization.
Jehovah really takes care
of everyone in his organization.
In 2011,
the Global Purchasing Department
found a player
that would really fit our needs.
What do they call the player?
We call it the unity player.
It comes from the idea of singing in unity
with our worldwide brotherhood.
OK. Unity player
—what does it look like?
It’s not big.
I have one here.
Can I show you?
Absolutely.
Here it is.
I was wondering what that was.
I thought it was your lunch.
Probably, my lunch
would be bigger than this.
But as you can see,
it’s very easy to carry,
very easy to operate,
and it’s very practical.
It can be plugged in if they have power,
but if they don’t have power,
it comes with a small solar panel,
so it can be charged by the sun.
You charge it with the sun.
Yes.
OK.
Yeah, and we have plenty of sun,
so that’s not a problem.
But even if the sun fails,
it comes with this hand crank,
so it can be charged manually.
Charge it by hand.
Yeah, exactly.
OK.
Very nice.
That’s very useful
for us there in Mozambique.
And it has a little place here
where we can insert
a micro SD card with all the songs.
So now it’s just play and sing.
Very nice.
But it looks like that’s not all.
Yes, it comes with this microphone.
So after singing, this unity player
can be used as the sound system;
so they can hear clearly
what is being taught at the meeting.
It sounds like it does
a lot more than your lunch would.
Exactly.
You know, I think it would be so neat
to just be able to see a congregation
when they get
a unity player for the first time.
Well, actually, you can see that.
Just take a look.
OK.
This is the Nhantshembene Congregation
in the south part of Mozambique.
Psalm 33 tells us
to “sing praises” to Jehovah,
“along with shouts of joy.”
But with no sound system,
if they shout joyfully
or sing fully from the heart
like they want to,
they will not hear the music.
Listening to the spiritual food
can also be difficult.
To help, the brothers send a request
for a unity player to the branch.
The Broadcasting Department
tests the new player.
SD cards are loaded
with all of the audio and video material
available to them in Changana.
Everything they need is packed inside
and is soon on its way to the congregation.
Setup is easy, and they quickly learn
how to use the solar panel
to charge the unit.
This meeting will be different.
Now they are able to sing to Jehovah
the way their hearts move them.
The Nhantshembene Congregation
greatly appreciates this blessing
and sends their love.
It’s beautiful to see the joy on their faces
when they get a unity player
and they’re able to sing again.
So it will be interesting to see
what new technology is available
that will be able to help Jehovah’s people
even in the remotest parts of the earth
to benefit in their true worship.
Thank you so much, Arlindo,
for being with us today.
Many of us have
a favorite Kingdom song or original song,
often because it evokes
in us a certain emotion.
Well, we’d like to invite some
of the students to the stage now.
And they’ve specially arranged
and are prepared to perform for us
one of our Kingdom songs.
Let’s listen to them.
How can we endure
When trials come, as Jesus said?
Through his pain he saw
The joy of better things ahead.
God’s promise, God’s justice,
Were thoughts on which he fed.
We need to have endurance.
Our faith we must defend.
His love is our assurance.
So we will keep enduring to the end.
Though the passing years
May bring us sorrow, bring us pain;
There beyond the tears,
We see the life that we can gain.
To be there, feel free there,
Determined we remain.
We need to have endurance.
Our faith we must defend.
His love is our assurance.
So we will keep enduring to the end.
We will not give up
Nor see the need for doubt or fear.
Faithfully we’ll serve
Until Jehovah’s day is here.
Let’s keep on enduring.
That time is very near.
We need to have endurance.
Our faith we must defend.
His love is our assurance.
So we will keep enduring to the end.
What a touching song!
And it very nicely introduces
our next couple and their amazing story.
Let’s welcome
Brother Laddie and Cecelia Sandy.
Brother and Sister Sandy,
you are coming from Sierra Leone.
And I understand that in 1997,
you participated
in the construction of the branch
and soon thereafter began serving there.
Is that correct?
Yes, very correct.
We are happily serving at the branch.
But I understand that things
didn’t remain that way, did they?
No, things changed really quickly
because our country
was divided into civil war,
and then just a month
after the branch dedication,
the rebels attacked Freetown.
So, Laddie, what happened?
The foreign missionaries were evacuated
to a safer place in neighboring Guinea,
and the expatriate Bethelites
also left the country.
So who was left
at the branch then, Laddie?
Just seven of us
—Cecelia, three single brothers,
a couple, and myself.
OK, so did just the seven of you
then stay in the branch?
No.
As things started getting worse,
the brothers kept coming
to the branch to seek refuge.
There were so many
that we couldn’t keep them all at the branch.
We started distributing them
to the different missionary homes
in Freetown.
So how many were you then at the branch?
We were about 70 to 80 brothers
and sisters at the branch.
Wow!
That’s amazing.
So, Cecelia, how did you
care for all those brothers and sisters?
Well, we shared the food that we had,
and the Bethel family
kept eating less and less
so our dear brothers
had what they needed.
OK.
Well, they look happy in that photograph.
Although, Laddie,
the picture doesn’t look so good.
That’s true.
It survived the war.
That’s why it has some scratches on it.
OK, right, I understand.
So when you were there, Cecelia,
were you able to go out at all?
Yes, we did.
We did our best to go out in the ministry.
But before going out in the morning,
we had to listen to the news
—the government’s radio and bush radio.
Ah, OK, government radio I understand
but bush radio?
I’m not sure I understand what that is.
Oh, it’s the news
that you get by word of mouth.
So the brothers would give their news,
passersby would give their news,
and then you decided
where it was safe to go on that day.
OK, I get it.
Bush radio—interesting.
Did you ever feel in danger?
Were you in danger at the branch?
Yes.
One night,
a brother and myself were in the lobby
and two armed rebels appeared
demanding that we open the door to them
to get access into the branch.
We were so frightened;
we ran to safety.
And they started shooting at the door
—the locks on the door.
But the door remained firm,
and they didn’t think
of shooting into the glass,
because the door had two glass panes
and that would help them
to get easy access into the building itself.
That was a very close call.
Yes.
So was that the end of it?
No, they came again.
They jumped the fence,
as you can see in the picture.
And this time,
about 20 or more well-armed rebels
shot their way into the branch.
They started looting everything in the branch
that they could lay hands on.
It was a big mess.
And that
must have been absolutely terrifying.
It was.
What happened
is that the brothers before that time
prepared a safe room for us to hide in,
in case of any emergency.
But that room was never my favorite.
I didn’t want to go into that room.
Did you have another room
that you thought you might like to go to?
I did.
I had my room that I preferred.
It had food inside.
It had AC inside
—very nice and clean.
It was very comfortable for me.
Cecelia, did you tell Laddie about that?
No, I didn’t tell him.
I didn’t mention it to anybody.
I just told Jehovah what I wanted to do,
and I kept telling Him that I hoped
the brothers would change their decision.
But why didn’t you tell Laddie?
I really didn’t want to influence him
about how I felt and what I wanted,
because it was not about us;
it was not about me;
it was about Jehovah and his people.
That’s very nice.
Laddie was responsible for many there,
and you didn’t want
to put that pressure on him.
Very interesting. Thank you.
So, Laddie, what happened now?
You’re down in the room.
What happened next?
We were in that safe room
trying very hard to stay out of sight,
and one of the rebels came
to the door where we were hiding
trying to gain access into the room.
While he was pushing on it,
forcing his way,
I heard one of the other armed men
yelling at him:
“Come from that place!
You seem to be too greedy.
We have more than enough.
Come, let’s go!”
And they just left like that.
You came out then?
No, we were still there
until the following morning.
It must have been terrifying
there in that room.
So was that the end then of troubles?
No, that was not the end.
The rebels also launched another operation
known as Operation No Living Thing.
Hang on, Operation No Living Thing.
What would that mean, Laddie?
Well, this was an operation that they decided
to just kill anybody
that came their way, any living thing
—dogs, animals, humans.
They just sprayed it like that.
That was the operation that was launched.
Wow!
You said there were
other refugees in the missionary homes.
How were they faring at this time?
They were not doing fine.
They were suffering just like us.
But we had some money with us at the branch.
So I decided to take some money for them
because if they have money,
they can get food to survive.
Although it was expensive
and also very dangerous
to take such a journey,
Cecelia decided to go with me.
Cecelia,
why did you decide to go with Laddie?
I decided to go because I thought
if Laddie was willing to die
for his brothers,
if that’s what it meant
for him to help them,
then I might as well die with him.
I didn’t want to live
and have to explain what happened.
Can you tell us, Laddie, what happened?
Were you able to reach the missionary home?
Yes.
We put the money into a bag,
and because there were a series of roadblocks
—checkpoints—
that we had to go through,
we decided to put some dirty clothes
and stinky rags on top of the money.
That would prevent them
from going deep down
to get access to the money.
And by having access to the money,
they would either kill us or take the money.
So we made it through several
of these checkpoints.
As we were approaching the missionary home,
at the last checkpoint there,
we saw a group of boys,
men, and women jubilating
—just jumping up and down in the streets.
You mean celebrating.
They were celebrating.
What were they celebrating?
Well, they were chanting:
“We’ve dropped the enemy jets.
We’ve dropped the enemy jets.
We’ve done it again.
We’re happy.”
What did you do then
to get through the checkpoint?
So we started to jump up and down
with them as a strategy
just to get our way
through to the missionary home.
Ah, so it’s the theocratic strategy.
Yes.
That’s a little bit like David
when he went to the city of Gath
and disguised his sanity.
OK.
I wonder, though,
how did you think of that?
Well, it just came spontaneously
that Jehovah directed us to do that
because this was not our plan.
And we were not expecting
anything like that to happen.
Sure.
Well, Jehovah helps
in every situation, excellent.
So you got through the checkpoint now.
So, what happened?
You made it to the missionary home?
Yes.
As we were very close
to the missionary home,
we threw the bag into the compound
—the missionary home.
The brothers came and took the bag
while we gained access safely
into the missionary home
and delivered the money.
And we tried to go back to the branch.
And you were able
to make it back to the branch?
Yes.
Safely?
That is an absolutely incredible story,
Laddie and Cecelia.
Thank you so much for sharing it with us.
Well, we know that in 2002,
the civil war ended.
And how has Jehovah blessed
the brothers and sisters in Sierra Leone
after enduring so much since that time?
We have a video
that we would like to show.
Do you want to see it?
I thought you might have one.
I’d love to see it.
OK, let’s watch.
Many believe that some 200 years ago,
freed American slaves
founded Freetown under this cotton tree.
For nearly a hundred years,
Jehovah’s Witnesses have comforted people
with hope of a better freedom
—“the glorious freedom
of the children of God.”
During the 11-year civil war,
700 people were baptized.
And since the war’s end in 2002,
the number of publishers
has more than doubled.
Here at the branch, we welcome visitors
to see how we are serving Jehovah
and caring for people’s spiritual needs.
Where soldiers once ransacked,
literature is being shipped
to 40 congregations.
Other Bethelites continue to work hard
for Kingdom interests.
This is Edward,
a hardworking brother in the Bethel Office.
He was one of the many
who found refuge at the branch.
Back then,
someone told him to always remember
how Jehovah protected and fed him.
He did remember.
And he serves with joy,
along with his brothers
and sisters in Sierra Leone.
Thank you so much for that.
Jehovah really has blessed
the brothers and sisters in Sierra Leone.
Now, you two,
through your experience, endured so much.
I wonder if you could share with us
some of the lessons
that you learned from your experience.
Cecelia, what would you say?
For me, it’s obedience.
I forcefully—
I forced myself to obey
when the brothers said
to go into that room that I didn’t like.
And I’m glad that I forced myself to obey
because as things turned out,
the room that I really, really preferred
was the worst damaged in the branch.
The food was all taken away.
They destroyed the door;
they gained access inside;
they destroyed the air conditioner.
They destroyed everything
beyond repair in that room.
Obedience saves our lives.
And we’re really happy too, Cecelia.
And I understand that that other room
now is your favorite room.
It is my favorite.
That’s where the commissary is.
And the very spot where we were hiding,
that’s where they put the bread shelf.
When I collect my bread,
I remember my story.
Laddie, what would you say?
What lesson did you learn?
No matter how challenging
the assignments may seem
or how dangerous
the situation may seem,
Jehovah is there
—and the international brotherhood too.
Their prayers in our behalf help us.
And if any other assignment
like that comes our way,
we’re willing to take it up
because Jehovah is there for us.
And our brothers
will also pray in our behalf.
Thank you so much, Laddie and Cecelia,
for sharing
your beautiful experience with us.
It has been a very encouraging program,
and we are so happy
to have been able to get to know some
of the members
of the 144th class of Gilead.
We look forward to seeing
and hearing experiences
of our brothers and sisters
living their faith
and displaying courage
and enduring in their service to Jehovah.
We thank you very much for being with us,
and we look forward to seeing you
on another edition of The Inside Story.